Patrick Kinney
11th ELA Midterm Study Guide

The Aeneid by Virgil:

Book 4. 495-500: “But Aeneas is driven by duty now strongly as he longs to ease and allay her sorrow, speak to her, turn away her anguish with reassurance, still, moaning deeply, heart shattered by his great love, in spite of all he obeys the gods' commands and back he goes to his ships.”


Book 6. 977-984: "Others, I have no doubt, will forge the bronze to breathe with suppler lines. draw from the block of marble features quick with life, plead their cases better, chart with their rods the stars that climb the sky and foretell the times they rise. But you, Roman, remember, rule with all your power the peoples of the earth-these will be your arts: to put your stamp on the works and ways of peace, to spare the defeated, break the proud in war.”



Book 12, 1090-1108: “Here, the victor and vanquished, I stretch my hands to you, so the men of Latium have seen me in defeat. Lavinia is your bride. Go no further down the road of hatred."
Aeneas, ferocious in armor, stood there, still, shifting his gaze, and held his sword-arm back. holding himself back too as Turnus' words began to sway him more and more… when all at once he caught sight of the fateful sword-belt of Pallas, swept over Turnus' shoulder, gleaming with shining studs Aeneas knew by heart, Young Pallas, whom Turnus had overpowered. taken down with a wound, and now his shoulder flaunted his enemy's battle-emblem like a trophy. Aeneas, soon as his eyes drank in that plunder-keepsake of his own savage grief-flaring up in fury. terrible in his rage, he cries: "Decked in the spoils you stripped from one I loved escape my clutches? Never– Pallas strikes this blow, Pallas sacrifices you now, makes you pay the price with your own guilty blood!”



Plato's Republic

Book 1.352a6-8 ("First, [injustice] will make...won't it?"): “First it will make him unable act, because he is at faction and is not of one mind with himself, am second, an enemy both to himself and to just men, won't it?” 



Book IV.443d ("But...harmonized."): "But in truth justice was, as it seems, something of this wet however, not with respect to a man's minding his external bodies, bot with respect to what is within, with respect to what truly concerns lam wed his own. He doesn't let each part in him mind other people's business or the three classes in the soul meddle with each other but really sets his own house in good order and rules himself, he imagines himself, becomes his own friend, and harmonizes the three parts, exactly like three notes in a harmonic scale, lowest, highest and middle. And if there are some other parts in between, he binds them together and becomes entirely one from many, moderate and harmonized.”



Book VII.519e-520a3 ("My friend...together."):  "My friend, you have again forgotten, I said, "that it's not the concern of law that any one class in the city fare exceptionally well, but it contrives to bring this about in the city as a whole, harmonizing the citizens by persuasion and compulsion, making them share with ane another the benefit that each is able to bring to the common-wealth. And it produces such men in the city not in order to let them turn whichever way each wants, but in order that it may use them in binding the city together.”



Book VII.532a ("Isn't this at last the song itself that dialectic: “isn't this at last the song itself that dialectic performs? It is in the realm of the intelligible, but it is imitated by the power of sight. We said that sight at last tries to look at the aramal themselves and at stars themselves and then finally at the sun also, when a man tries y discussion-by means of angemat with the use of any of the senses to attain to cach thing toelf that doesn't give up before he grasps by intellection helf that what..good itself, he comes to the very end of the intelligible reales just as thai and other man was then of the end of the visible.” 



Book VIII.576a ("Therefore,...true friendship"): 
"Therefore, they live their whole life without ever being friends anyone, always one man's master or another's slave. The tyrann ture never has a taste of freedom or true friendship.”
Book IX.586d-587a (Therefore... the truest pleasures."): "Therefore, when all the soul follows the philosophic and is not fictious, the result is that each part may, so far as other things are con orned, mind its own business and be just and, in particular, enjoy it own pleasures, the best pleasures, and, to the greatest posible extent, the truest pleasures.”



Book 9.590c7-d1-6 ("In order that...by the same thing."): "In order that such a man also be ruled by something similar to what rules the best man, don't we say that he must be the slave of that best man who has the divine rule in himself? It's not that we suppose the slave must be ruled to his own detriment, as Thrasymachus sup-posed about the ruled; but that it's better for all to be ruled by what is divine and prudent, especially when one has it as his own within him-self; but, if not, set over one from outside, so that insofar as possible all will be alike and friends, piloted by the same thing.”




 Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics

Book I chapter 1, line 1: “EVERY art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and choice, is thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things aim.”

He says this to set up the target for his goal, explaining Virtue. All actions aim at the good, or why else would we do them? Virtuous actions are when our actions are truly good. We can not attain the good in this life, but we can get closer through virtue. He talks a lot about virtue and describes it as the mean between excess and deficiency. Taking this middle path helps your actions to be truly good.

Book II, chapter 1, lines 24-25: “Neither by nature, then, nor contrary to nature do the virtues arise in us; rather we are adapted by nature to receive them, and are made perfect by habit.”

Virtues are not naturally in us by we receive them by being taught and through habit. Virtue is affected through habit. Moral virtues you learn by doing them, and if made a habit, you become a virtuous person. How to be a virtuous person is the main question ut the book, so habit is an important topic. Virtue has to be a habit, or it is just one good action. If a bad Person does one good action, that does not make him virtuous.

Book II, chapter 3, 9-14: “For moral virtue is concerned with pleasures and pains, it is on account of the pleasure that we do bad things, and on account of the pain that we abstain from noble ones. Hence, we ought to have been brought up in a particular way from our very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in and to be pained by the things that we ought; this is the right education.”

Here Aristotle is talking about how we should treat pleasure and pain. If we take pleasure in the right things and pain in the right things, we will be better people. The major goal of his book is to teach how to be a good man, and a large part of that is loving what we ought. If we do this, it will lead us to virtue, another large part of his book. He says learning what is right to love is the goal of education and relates this to Plato, who said something similar.

Book VIII.3, 1156b7-9: “Perfect friendship is the friendship of men who are good, and alike in virtue, for these wish well alike to each other qua good, and they are good in themselves.”

Aristotle describes the perfect friendship in this quote. He also calls this a virtuous friendship because both people must be virtuous. He spends a large portion of the ethics talking about how to be virtuous. He says that having a virtuous friendship is important for being a better person. The combination of a good friendship and the buildup of virtue is very beneficial. In a virtuous friendship, you want what is best for the other person, and this means you will both continually grow in virtue.

Book IX.9, 1169b17-19 ("Surely,...others."): “Surely it is strange, too, to make the supremely happy many a solitary, for no one would choose the whole world on condition of being alone, since man is a political creature and one whose nature is to live with others”
