 #1: Tripartite Soul ~ 5/5
In Plato’s Republic, Socrates explains that the soul is made of three distinct parts: the rational, the spirited, and the desiring. The rational part allows man to reason about his situation. The spirited part gives him emotions such as anger and bloodlust. The desiring part contains his desires for wealth and status. Socrates claims that the three must be harmonized so that none of them are fully in control. If the desiring part is in control, man turns into a tyrant. However, not all the parts are equal. The rational part should guide the other parts in their fulfillment. The rational part is the only part that can keep harmony within the others.
When the rational part guides them, bothRepublic the spirited part and desiring part can still be satisfied.
Analogy to City (Classes and Philosopher King)
The parts of the soul also correspond to the classes in Socrates’s city.


Republic #2: Tyrannical Man ~ 3.5/5
Thesis: Tyrants can never have true friendship because the desiring part of their soul is in full control.
P1: Explain Tripartite Soul
P2: A tyrant controlled by desire cannot truly love his friend. Their desire comes first.
P3: A tyrant controlled by desire puts himself higher than any other person. Socrates says friends arise more easily out of common status. Connection to pride.
Ethics #1: Nature of Virtue in Man ~ 3.5/5
P1: In the Ethics, Aristotle explains that virtue does not arise in man naturally, but man is still able to receive virtue. Talk more about nature of virtue: nature not against it
P2: Virtue is a choice – Education.
The nature of virtue as a habit also shows that virtue is a choice.
P3: Continence vs Incontinence
Talk about friendship
Because virtue is a choice, Aristotle defines 2 intermediate states of character describing someone’s relation to virtue and vice. Continence means that someone chooses to do good despite not enjoying it. Incontinence means that someone chooses to do bad because they enjoy it, despite knowing what is good. Continence and incontinence ultimately build the habit of virtue or vice and provide a means to change.
Ethics #2: Moral Virtue is Concerned with Pleasures and Pains (Education) ~ 4/5
P1: Pleasure and pain drive us to do things and therefore build habits that are either virtuous or viceful. Education is the process of presenting pleasure or pain to an individual so that they do virtuous things rather than viceful things and build that habit.
P2: Types of friendship
P3: Education in virtue takes place in two main ways: law and friendship. The law of a government is put in place to punish vice, and therefore build the habit of virtue. As such, it provides a baseline for the education an individual receives within society. Aristotle describes true friendship as also educating the participants in virtue.
Pride and Prejudice #1: Pride vs Vanity ~ 4/5
Possible Claims:
- Pride is more damaging that vanity, although it can be deserved
- Darcy doesn’t have proper pride, its exceeds how much he deserves to have
- Bingley is vain but doesn’t hurt his happiness in marriage
Mary Bennet explains that pride is inward-facing, and is an individual’s opinion of himself, whereas vanity is outward-facing, and is an individual’s desire for others to have a good opinion of them. Mary later claims that pride can be good, when it is deserved. However, pride is much more damaging and restrictive than vanity.
At the start of the book, Darcy is the epitome of pride. He looks down on everyone, including Elizabeth.
Darcy’s pride prevents them from marrying. When Elizabeth is at Pemberly, it becomes clear that Darcy has done a lot of good to make himself deserving of pride. However, he is still
Mr. Bingley is an interesting example of vanity. In a small passage, Elizabeth and Darcy reveal to Bingley that he is vain. Darcy says that Bingley claimed that he could leave town quickly if he truly wanted to because he wants to show that he has no attachment and is a decisive person. It is a fundamentally vain maneuver rather than a truthful one. However, Bingley seems good-natured and agreeable and his marriage with Jane is seen as a happy one. This shows that while vanity is a flaw, it is not always so destructive.
Pride and Prejudice #2: Happiness in Marriage ~ 2/5
Passions vs Virtue
Lydia + Wickham: married bc passion and greed
Bennets: married bc passion and greed
- bad for children
- unhappy marriage
Happiness in marriage lies in:
- mutual respect
- virtuous friendship
Pride and Prejudice #3: Darcy’s Growth ~ 1/5
Virtuous friendship in marriage
respect advice

The final reason for marriage, Austen gives the reader, is a marriage based on love. Love is an emotion that develops through a holistic understanding of a person, meaning a person knows both the strengths and the flaws of the other. This kind of relationship is best shown in Elizabeth and Darcy. The relationship begins with the most disdain for each other. Their faults seem clearly obvious to the other, even causing Elizabeth to fall into a prejudiced view of Darcy. Over time, the two can see the good in each other. Darcy is the first to notice Elizabeth, seeing the Good in her character, leading him, and a moment of weakness, to propose. However, because of Elizabeth’s prejudiced view of Darcy, she rejects him. This interaction allows Darcy to see a side of Elizabeth. He has never seen and calls Elizabeth out on those faults in a letter. Elizabeth responds well, checking her prejudice. Through this character development, Elizabeth is finally able to see the good in Darcy, and from this comes love: 
She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew what…. She was [now]convinced that she could have been happy with him…. How could you know that the proposal which she had probably spurned… Would now have been gladly and gratefully received (295).
Elizabeth and Darcy’s relationship is able to develop into love through trials and growth. The couple goes from hating each other to being madly in love because of the comprehensive understanding of the other. At the end of the novel, Darcy and Elizabeth have a very intimate conversation, and Darcy reveals the betterment of himself that Elizabeth had caused: 
“[I realized that] I have been a selfish being all my life, and practice, though not in principle…. Such I might still have been, but not for you, dearest, loveliest, Elizabeth! What do I not owe you!… By you, I was properly humbled” (349). 
Because Elizabeth knew Darcy’s faults, Darcy was able to grow. Because of their growth, the two grew closer. The growth between the couple is what sparks their love. They know each other and are happy with each other. Un	like marriages based on passion and material gain; love-based marriages produce lasting happiness because they are built on a strong relationship, their ability to grow, and the betterment of the people involved. 

Gospel of John #1: The Word Made Flesh
P1: Jesus as God’s messenger
P2: Jesus as God’s character
P3: Moses vs Jesus Comparison
Gospel of John #2: Woman Caught in Adultery
Redefines justice and punishment
Redemption over punishment
“sin no more”
only God has the ability to judge, not sinful humans
Gospel of John #3: I no longer call you servants but friends
personal relationship with Jesus
connection to virtuous friendship from Aristotle
Connection to Confessions: Jesus picked them, Augustine believes conversion is a result of God’s grace rather than his own attempt. Connection to his idea about memory?
Confessions #1: Stealing Pears
influence of friends on virtue/vice
Virtuous/viceful friendship
Incontinence and vice
Confessions #2: Conflict of Wills
context: heard the story of Vindicianus who converted to Christianity and joined the Church, left his teaching profession
Incontinence = perversion of the will
Servant of the flesh: habit of vice
Spirit: continence
“Give me chastity and continence but not yet”

In the Confessions, Augustine hears the story of Vindicianus, a professor who converted to Christianity and joined the Church, leaving his profession behind. Augustine wants to follow in his footsteps but he is prevented by his own will. He says that, “(servant of the flesh, other of the spirit, in conflict)”. Augustine’s situation is an example of incontinence. Although a part of his will, which knows he is doing wrong, wants him to convert, the other part, his habit of vice, overpowers it.
Continence vs Incontinence, ability to change habits
Confessions #3: What do I love when I love my God?
God is not material. Previously, he was under the assumption that God was material which led him to Manicheism and prevented him from understanding Catholicism
Dialectic
- Manichees are not enough
- Asking questions to himself: is self enough for dialectic?
Henriad #1: Hal’s Reformation
context: early book, planning prank on Falstaff, shows Hal’s double nature
Hal thinks he can become a good king when he is needed. Believes that England will think better of him if he has a huge reformation.
Did Hal change or was it calculated?
Gets rid of Falstaff when he comes to power
Is a great king, plan works, people love him
Did he struggle at all?
Still pays attention to common folk, listens among his own soldiers
Still enjoys banter with Falstaff, shows that there’s still some part of him that stayed with the tavern
Offer of marriage to the princess
Seems staged
Hal’s use of flattery
Hal is eager for the crown, thinks his father is dead and tries to take it. Still doesn’t want his father to be dead tho.
Aquinas #1: Man desires all for the last end
Context: Aquinas just proved that man has only one last end; after this he explains that all men have the same last end but do not agree in what the aspect of the last end is realized
Evil = corrupted view of subordinate ends; disconnect between last and subordinate ends
What is the last end: happiness vs fame vs glory vs power
Perfection is possible but not on earth bc survival needs
P1: Aquinas states that man desires everything in order to attain the last end. This is significant because it claims that there is a singular objective to human life. 
P2: The last end is happiness. Discuss other alternatives
Wealth - natural (needs), artificial (money); can’t be either bc they just satisfy needs
Honor - only given bc of recognized excellence, result of happiness
Fame and Glory - dependent on human judgement/knowledge which is fallible
Power - power can be used for good or evil but happiness is good; God’s power is good bc he is good
“Power has nature of principle…. [it] is towards good and evil”
P3: Evil has disconnect between last and subordinate ends
Aquinas #2: Pleasure vs Happiness
“Delight is a proper accident of happiness”
Context: what happiness consists of? Wealth, honor, fame/glory, power
Delight is not a subordinate end of happiness
Should not seek delight/pleasure
Seeking pleasure as a subordinate end does not lead to happiness.
Aquinas #3: Everyone Desires to be Happy
Q5A8: Whether every man desires happiness?
Every man desires to be happy HOWEVER not every man knows in what happiness consists -> talk about places happiness does not consist. Happiness consists in union with God

Aquinas claims that all men desire 
