Microcontroller units (MCUs) and microprocessor units (MPUs) are two kinds of integrated circuits that, while similar in certain ways, are very different in many others. Replacing antiquated multi-component central processing units (CPUs) with separate logic units, these single-chip processors are both extremely valuable in the continued development of computing technology. However, microcontrollers and microprocessors differ significantly in component structure, chip architecture, performance capabilities and application.

The key difference between these two units is that microcontrollers combine all the necessary elements of a microcomputer system onto a single piece of hardware. Microcontrollers do not require additional peripherals or complex operating systems to function, while microprocessors do. Both circuits contain CPUs, however, microcontrollers also integrate memory, input/output (I/O) components and other varied peripherals.

Cost-effective and small-in-size, low-power microcontrollers are optimized for all-in-one functionality. As a result, these units are best used for specific applications like automotive infotainment systems and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices.

Conversely, general-purpose microprocessors are typically more powerful and are designed to be supported by specialized hardware for increased performance in demanding applications like personal computing and graphics processing.
On a hardware level, microprocessors are based on the “classical” von Neumann architecture. This consists of a CPU with both an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) and processor registers (small amounts of fast memory storage for quick data access), a control unit, memory for data and instructions, external memory for mass storage, and I/O mechanisms. This methodology uses the same set of interconnecting wires (known as a bus) to both transmit instructions and perform operations. Microprocessors cannot perform these actions simultaneously, yet modern devices use various mitigation techniques to avoid data bottlenecks.

On the other hand, microcontrollers use the more complex Harvard architecture, which has one dedicated set of data buses and address buses for reading and writing data to memory, and another set to fetch instructions for performing operations. Since the CPU can both read an instruction and access data memory at the same time, the Harvard architecture can perform basic operations faster.

The Harvard architecture excels at real-time and high-speed computing tasks. However, the unified data and instructions memory space of the simplified von Neumann architecture results in improved reliability and scalability. For this reason, von Neumann-based microprocessors are favored for more demanding tasks such as high-performance computing (HPC) and gaming, while microcontrollers are typically used to handle fast signal processing.
