Quotes for Lit Final (11th) 
"But in truth justice was, as it seems, something of this sort; however, not with respect to a man's minding his external business, but with respect to what is within, with respect to what truly concerns him and his own. He doesn't let each part in him mind other people's business or the three classes in the soul meddle with each other, but really sets his own house in good order and rules himself; he arranges himself, becomes his own friend, and harmonizes the three parts, exactly like three notes in a harmonic scale, lowest, highest, and middle. And if there are some other parts in between, he binds them together and becomes entirely one from many, moderate and harmonized" (Book IV.443d)- The Republic, By Plato, Socrates talking to Glaucon
"Therefore, they live their whole life without ever being friends of anyone, always one man's master or another's slave. The tyrannic nature never has a taste of freedom or true friendship" (Book IX.576a)- The Republic, By Plato, Socrates talking to Glaucon and Adeimantus.
"Neither by nature, then, nor contrary to nature do the virtues arise in us; rather we are adapted by nature to receive them, and are made perfect by habit" (Book II.1.24-25)- The Ethics, By Aristotle, Aristotle is narrating
"For moral virtue is concerned with pleasures and pains; it is on account of the pleasure that we do bad things, and on account of the pain that we abstain from noble ones. Hence, we ought to have been brought up in a particular way from our very youth, as Plato says, so as both to delight in and to be pained by the things that we ought" (Book II.3.9-14)- The Ethics, By Aristotle, Aristotle is narrating
"Pride... is a very common failing I believe. By all that I have ever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed, that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of some other quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us" (p. 21). - Pride & Prejudice, by Jane Austen, Mary talking to the Bennets and Lucases
"Man must, of necessity, desire all, whatsoever he desires, for the last end. This is evident for two reasons. First, because whatever man desires, he desires it under the aspect of good. And if he desire it, not as his perfect good, which is the last end, he must, of necessity, desire it as tending to the perfect good, because the beginning of anything is always ordained to its completion... Secondly, because the last end stands in the same relation in moving the appetite, as the first mover in other movements" (Q1.A6)- Summa Theologica, by Thomas Aquinas
"Because bodily delights are more generally known, 'the name of pleasure has been appropriated to them', although other delights excel them: and yet happiness does not consist in them. Because in every thing, that which pertains to its essence is distinct from its proper accident: thus in man it is one thing that he is a mortal rational animal, and another that he is a risible animal. We must therefore consider that every delight is a proper accident resulting from happiness, or from some part of happiness" (Q2.A6) - Summa Theologica, by Thomas Aquinas
"Therefore, everyone desires to be happy" (Q5.A8) - Summa Theologica, by Thomas Aquinas
14 The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only Son, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth. 15 (John testified concerning him. He cried out, saying, “This is the one I spoke about when I said, ‘He who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.’”) 16 Out of his fullness we have all received grace in place of grace already given. 17 For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. 18 No one has ever seen God, but the one and only Son, who is himself God and[b] is in closest relationship with the Father, has made him known.(John 1: 14-18) – Gospel of John, by John, talking about the orgin of Jesus 
1 but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.2 At dawn he appeared again in the temple courts, where all the people gathered around him, and he sat down to teach them. 3 The teachers of the law and the Pharisees brought in a woman caught in adultery. They made her stand before the group 4 and said to Jesus, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the act of adultery. 5 In the Law Moses commanded us to stone such women. Now what do you say?” 6 They were using this question as a trap, in order to have a basis for accusing him. But Jesus bent down and started to write on the ground with his finger. 7 When they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let any one of you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.” 8 Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.9 At this, those who heard began to go away one at a time, the older ones first, until only Jesus was left, with the woman still standing there. 10 Jesus straightened up and asked her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?”11 “No one, sir,” she said. “Then neither do I condemn you,” Jesus declared. “Go now and leave your life of sin.”12 When Jesus spoke again to the people, he said, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”13 The Pharisees challenged him, “Here you are, appearing as your own witness; your testimony is not valid.”14 Jesus answered, “Even if I testify on my own behalf, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I am going. But you have no idea where I come from or where I am going. 15 You judge by human standards; I pass judgment on no one. 16 But if I do judge, my decisions are true, because I am not alone. I stand with the Father, who sent me. 17 In your own Law it is written that the testimony of two witnesses is true. 18 I am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the Father, who sent me.” (John 8:1-18) – Gospel of John, by John, Jesus talking to the Pharisees, his disciples, and an adulteress
12 My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you. 13 Greater love has no one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends. 14 You are my friends if you do what I command. 15 I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business. Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you. 16 You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you so that you might go and bear fruit—fruit that will last—and so that whatever you ask in my name the Father will give you. 17 This is my command: Love each other. – Gospel of John, By John, Jesus talking to his disciples
“But it was not the fruit that gave me pleasure, I must have gotten it form the crime itself, from the thrill of having the partners of sin” (52). – The Confessions, By Augustine, Augustine describing his life as a youth
“So these too wills within me, one old, one new, one servant of the flesh, the other of the spirit, were in conflict and between them they tore my soul apart” (164) – The Confessions, By Augustine, Augustine reflecting about his spiritual state
“But what do I love when I love my God? Not material beauty or beauty of… [through]This is what I love when I love my God” (211-12) – The Confessions, By Augustine, reflecting on where is God… Monica has just died
“Yet herein will I imitate the sun / who doth permit the base contagious clouds. / to smother up his beauty from the world / that, when he please again to be himself, / being wanted, he may be more wondered at / by breaking through the foul and ugly mists / of vapors that did seem to strangle him.” (Henry IV, I.II, 204-210) – The Henriad, William Shakespear, Hal thinking to himself about his character and where he wants it

